Fusion upgrade guides (#8214)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/fusion-upgrade-prepare.md

If <Constant name="fusion" /> is brand new to you, take a look at our [comprehensive documentation](/docs/fusion) on what it is, how it behaves, and what's different from <Constant name="core" /> before getting started with this guide. Once you're caught up, it's time to begin preparing your projects for the speed and power that <Constant name="fusion" /> has to offer.

## Prerequisites

This guide will cover the preparations for upgrading to the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and is intended for customers already using the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> with a version of <Constant name="core" />. If you're brand new to dbt, check out our [quickstart guides](/guides).

To follow the steps in this guide, you must meet the following prerequisites:

- You're using a <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> account on any tier.
- You have a developer license.
- You have [proper permissions](/docs/cloud/manage-access/enterprise-permissions) to edit projects.

> - While not a strict requirement, it's strongly recommended you focus on a project using a <Constant name="fusion" /> supported adapter:

Reviewer: does the guide meaningfully apply to users that don't use a fusion-supported adapter? if so then this makes sense. if it doesn't really apply, i suggest being clear that it's a requirement that they use those adapters. 

otherwise, if it's required for me to be successful but not technically enforced - i'd be confused and not sure whether this guide applies to me or not. maybe we can have a 'add'l support coming soon'.

Author: It _could_ be and I juggled back and forth here, but you're right. Let's just focus on Fusion
```suggestion
- Your project is using a <Constant name="fusion" /> supported adapter:
```

    <FusionAdapters/>

:::tip Upgrading your first project

Start with smaller, newer, or more familiar projects first. This makes it easier to identify and troubleshoot any issues before upgrading larger, more complex projects.

:::

> ## Upgrade to the latest dbt version

Author: ```suggestion
## Upgrade to the latest dbt Core version
```

> If you have multiple dbt projects you want to upgrade to <Constant name="fusion" /> , start with smaller, newer, or more familiar projects first. This makes it easier to identify and troubleshoot any issues before upgrading larger, more complex projects.

Reviewer: sugg condensing this
```suggestion
To upgrade your project(s) to <Constant name="fusion" />, start by upgrading your smaller, newer, or most familiar dbt projects. This makes it easier to spot and troubleshoot issues before tackling larger, more complex ones.
```

Author: Going to condense further to prevent repetitive language
```suggestion
Start with smaller, newer, or more familiar projects first. This makes it easier to identify and troubleshoot any issues before upgrading larger, more complex projects.
```

> ## Upgrade to the latest dbt version

Reviewer 2: dbt _Core_ version? Arguably Fusion is the latest version of dbt.

> Before upgrading to <Constant name="fusion" />, you need to move your environments to the `Latest` [release track](/docs/dbt-versions/cloud-release-tracks). The `Latest` track includes all the features and tooling to help you prepare for <Constant name="fusion" />, and ensures the smoothest upgrade experience by validating that your project doesn't rely on deprecated behaviors.

Author: ```suggestion
Before upgrading to <Constant name="fusion" />, you need to move your environments to the `Latest` [<Constant name="core" /> release track](/docs/dbt-versions/cloud-release-tracks). The `Latest` track includes all the features and tooling to help you prepare for <Constant name="fusion" />. It ensures the smoothest upgrade experience by validating that your project doesn't rely on deprecated behaviors.
```

:::

### Step 1: Test in development (using override)

Test the `Latest` release track for your individual account without changing the environment for your entire team:

1. Click your account name in the left sidebar and select **Account settings**.
2. Select **Credentials** from the sidebar and choose your project.
3. In the side panel, click **Edit** and scroll to **User development settings**.
4. Select **Latest** from the **dbt version** dropdown and click **Save**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-configuring-dbt-cloud/choosing-dbt-version/example-override-version.png" width="60%" title="Override dbt version in your account settings"/>

5. Launch the <Constant name="cloud_ide" /> or <Constant name="cloud_cli" /> and test your normal development workflows.
6. Verify the override is active by running any dbt command and checking the **System Logs**. The first line should show `Running with dbt=` and your selected version. If the version number is `v1.11` or higher, you're on the right path to <Constant name="fusion" /> readiness.

> If everything works as expected, proceed to upgrade your environments. If you encounter deprecation warnings, don't fear! We're going to address those later in this guide. If you encounter errors, revert to your previous version and refer to the [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) to resolve any differences between your current version and the latest available <Constant name="core" /> version.

Author: ```suggestion
If everything works as expected, proceed to the next step to start upgrading your environments. If you encounter deprecation warnings, don't fear! We'll address those [later in this guide](/guides/prepare-fusion-upgrade?step=4). If you encounter errors, revert to your previous version and refer to the [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) to resolve any differences between your current version and the latest available <Constant name="core" /> version.
```

> If everything works as expected, proceed to upgrade your environments. If you encounter deprecation warnings, don't fear! We're going to address those later in this guide. If you encounter errors, revert to your previous version and refer to the [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) to resolve any differences between your current version and the latest available <Constant name="core" /> version.

Reviewer: link to the 'address this later in this guide'.. to https://docs-getdbt-com-git-upgrade-guide-dbt-labs.vercel.app/guides/prepare-fusion-upgrade?step=4#resolve-all-deprecation-warnings?

> If everything works as expected, proceed to upgrade your environments. If you encounter deprecation warnings, don't fear! We're going to address those later in this guide. If you encounter errors, revert to your previous version and refer to the [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) to resolve any differences between your current version and the latest available <Constant name="core" /> version.

Reviewer: > If everything works as expected, proceed to upgrade your environments.

which enviroments?

Author: I'll clarify

> ### Step 2: Upgrade your development environment

Reviewer: is this development environment or deployment? the screenshot is confusing

Author: Bah, wrong screenshot. I'll fix it

> After successfully testing with the override, upgrade the development environment for your entire team (be sure to give them notice!):

Reviewer: might be helpful to say how this differs to the user dev credentials?

## Resolve all deprecation warnings

<Constant name="fusion" /> enforces strict validation and won't accept deprecated code that currently generates warnings in <Constant name="core" />. You must resolve all deprecation warnings before upgrading to <Constant name="fusion" />. Fortunately, the autofix tool in the <Constant name="cloud_ide" /> can automatically resolve most common deprecations for you.

:::tip VS Code extension

This guide provides steps to resolve deprecation warnings without leaving <Constant name="dbt_platform" />. If you prefer to work in the VS Code or Cursor editors locally, you can run the autofix in our dbt VS Code extension. Check out the [installation guide](/docs/install-dbt-extension) for more information about those workflows.

:::

### What the autofix tool handles

The autofix tool can resolve many deprecations automatically, including:

- Moving custom configurations into the `meta` dictionary
- Fixing duplicate YAML keys
- Correcting unrecognized resource properties
- Updating deprecated configuration patterns

> Check out our [deprecation references](/reference/deprecations) for a complete list.

Author: ```suggestion
Check out the [autofix readme](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix/) for a complete list of the deprecations it addresses.
```

> Check out our [deprecation references](/reference/deprecations) for a complete list.

Reviewer 2: Do you want to link to the readme instead, to see which ones can be fixed? https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix/ 

That currently reads as "go here for a complete list of fixable deprecations", but I imagine it's actually the full list of deprecations including some that autofix can’t handle

1. Navigate to the <Constant name="cloud_ide" /> by clicking **Studio** in the left-side menu.
2. Click the **Version control** panel (git branch icon) on the left sidebar.
3. Click **Create branch** and name it something descriptive like `fusion-deprecation-fixes`.
4. Click **Create** to switch to your new branch.

:::warning Save before autofixing

The autofix tool will modify files in your project. Make sure to commit or stash any unsaved work to avoid losing changes.

:::

### Step 2: Run the autofix tool

Now you're ready to scan for and automatically fix deprecation warnings:

1. Click the **three-dot menu** in the bottom right corner of the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />.
2. Select **Check & fix deprecations**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-options-menu-with-save.png" width="90%" title="Access the Studio IDE options menu"/>

The tool runs `dbt parse --show-all-deprecations --no-partial-parse` to identify all deprecations in your project. This may take a few moments depending on your project size.

3. When parsing completes, view the results in the **Command history** panel in the bottom left.

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/command-history.png" width="90%" title="View command history and deprecation results"/>

Reviewer: small nit but might be more scalable to have a quick gif to show steps 2-3 instead of having 2 screenshots (esp once the new ui is rolled out to users)

Author: I've sourced mostly existing screenshots so they'll be updated here as well, but I'll try to capture that for a follow up

2. Click **Commit and sync** to save your changes.

### Step 6: Address remaining deprecations

If the autofix tool reports remaining deprecation warnings that couldn't be automatically fixed:

1. Review the warning messages in the **Command history** panel. Each warning includes the file path and line number.
2. Manually update the code based on the deprecation guidance:
   - Custom inputs should be moved to the `meta` config.
   - Deprecated properties should be updated to their new equivalents.
   - Refer to specific [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) for detailed migration instructions.
3. After making manual fixes, run **Check & fix deprecations** again to verify all warnings are resolved.
4. Commit your changes.

### Step 7: Merge to your main branch

Once all deprecations are resolved:

1. Create a pull request in your git provider to merge your deprecation fixes.
2. Have your team review the changes.
3. Merge the PR to your main development branch.
4. Ensure these changes are deployed to your environments before proceeding with the <Constant name="fusion" /> upgrade.

## Validate and upgrade your dbt packages

> dbt packages extend your project's functionality, but they must be compatible with <Constant name="fusion" />. Most commonly used packages from dbt Labs (like `dbt_utils` and `dbt_project_evaluator`) and many community packages [already support <Constant name="fusion" />](/docs/fusion/supported-features#package-support). Before upgrading, verify your packages are compatible and upgrade them to the latest versions.

Reviewer: since we're working on having a badge (not yet avail) - how can uses know if their package is compatible? should we mention that if the package supports version 2.0 - then it's compatibie w fusion?

Author: That's worth a mention but it's not the definitive way (see Joels feedback below). I'll add that they should check with the package maintainer (if they don't see theirs on the list)

:::tip What if a package isn't compatible?

If a critical package isn't yet compatible with <Constant name="fusion" />:
- Check with the package maintainer about their roadmap
- Open an issue requesting <Constant name="fusion" /> support

> - Consider contributing the compatibility updates yourself

Author: ```suggestion
- Consider contributing the compatibility updates yourself
- Try it out anyway! The incompatible portion of the package might not impact your project. 
```

> :::

Reviewer 2: Just because a package doesn't explicitly report Fusion compatibility, doesn't mean that it won't work in your project. The package might only contain one incompatible macro; if your project doesn't use that then you'll be fine.

If a package isn't compatible, just try it anyway! It might work for your use case.

Author: Good to know!

:::

### Step 1: Review the limitations table

Start by understanding which features have limited or no support in <Constant name="fusion" />:

Visit the [Fusion supported features page](/docs/fusion/supported-features#limitations) and review the limitations table to see features that may affect your project.

Common limitations include:
- **Python models:** Not currently supported (Fusion cannot parse Python to extract dependencies)
- **Microbatch incremental strategy:**  Not yet available
- **Model-level notifications:** Job-level notifications work, model-level don't yet
- **Semantic Layer development:** Active semantic model development should stay on <Constant name="core" />
- **SQLFluff linting:** Not integrated yet (though linting will be built into <Constant name="fusion" /> directly)

### Step 2: Search your project for limited features

> Check if your project uses any features with limited support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check if your project uses any features with limited support. For example:
```

1. Check for Python models:
   - In the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />, look in your `models/` directory
   - Search for files with `.py` extensions
   - If found, you'll need to either remove them or keep those models on <Constant name="core" />

2. Review your `dbt_project.yml` for specific configurations:
   - Look for `store_failures` settings
   - Check for custom materializations beyond `view`, `table`, and `incremental`
   - Review any `warn-error` or `warn-error-options` configurations

3. Check your job configurations:
   - Review any jobs using `--fail-fast` flag
   - Identify jobs using `--store-failures`
   - Note any Advanced CI "compare changes" workflows

4. Review model governance settings:
   - Search for models with `deprecation_date` set
   - Note these may not generate deprecation warnings yet in <Constant name="fusion" />

### Step 3: Assess the impact

For each limitation that affects your project, determine its criticality:

> - **Critical features:** Features your project can't function without:

Reviewer: 🔥

---
title: "Upgrade to Fusion part 1: Preparing to upgrade"
id: "prepare-fusion-upgrade"
level: 'Intermediate'
icon: 'zap'

> hide_table_of_contents: true

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should set to `false` /show ToC because there are so many subsections. It might be nice to see what you're getting into.

Author: @runleonarun Great idea! In testing this, however, the left-side contents display every section but only allow you to navigate between headers in the section currently on screen. I'll have to see if the web team knows what we can do there

> tags: ['dbt Fusion engine', 'dbt platform','Quickstart']

Author: ```suggestion
tags: ['dbt Fusion engine', 'dbt platform', 'Upgrade']
```

4. Select **Latest** from the **dbt version** dropdown and click **Save**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-configuring-dbt-cloud/choosing-dbt-version/example-override-version.png" width="60%" title="Override dbt version in your account settings"/>

5. Launch the <Constant name="cloud_ide" /> or <Constant name="cloud_cli" /> and test your normal development workflows.
6. Verify the override is active by running any dbt command and checking the **System Logs**. The first line should show `Running with dbt=` and your selected version. If the version number is `v1.11` or higher, you're on the right path to <Constant name="fusion" /> readiness.

If everything works as expected, proceed to the next step to start upgrading your environments. If you encounter deprecation warnings, don't fear! We'll address those [later in this guide](/guides/prepare-fusion-upgrade?step=4). If you encounter errors, revert to your previous version and refer to the [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) to resolve any differences between your current version and the latest available <Constant name="core" /> version.

### Step 2: Upgrade your development environment

> After successfully testing with the override, upgrade the development environment for your entire team (be sure to give them notice!):

Author: ```suggestion
After successfully testing your individual development environment with the override, upgrade the development environment for the entire project (be sure to give your team notice!):
```

The tool automatically modifies your project files to resolve fixable deprecations, then runs another parse to identify any remaining warnings.

4. When complete, a success message appears. Click **Review changes**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/autofix-success.png" width="90%" title="Autofix complete"/>

### Step 4: Verify the changes

Review the changes made by the autofix tool to ensure they're correct:

1. Open the **Version control** panel to view all modified files.
2. Click on individual files to review the specific changes.
3. Look for files with moved configurations, corrected properties, or updated syntax.
4. If needed, make any additional manual adjustments.

### Step 5: Commit your changes

Once you're satisfied with the autofix changes, commit them to your branch:

1. In the **Version control** panel, add a descriptive commit message like "Fix deprecation warnings for Fusion upgrade".
2. Click **Commit and sync** to save your changes.

### Step 6: Address remaining deprecations

If the autofix tool reports remaining deprecation warnings that couldn't be automatically fixed:

> 1. Review the warning messages in the **Command history** panel — each warning includes the file path and line number.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Review the warning messages in the **Command history** panel. Each warning includes the file path and line number.
```

2. Manually update the code based on the deprecation guidance:
   - Custom inputs should be moved to the `meta` config.
   - Deprecated properties should be updated to their new equivalents.
   - Refer to specific [version upgrade guides](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade) for detailed migration instructions.
3. After making manual fixes, run **Check & fix deprecations** again to verify all warnings are resolved.
4. Commit your changes.

### Step 7: Merge to your main branch

Once all deprecations are resolved:

1. Create a pull request in your git provider to merge your deprecation fixes.
2. Have your team review the changes.
3. Merge the PR to your main development branch.
4. Ensure these changes are deployed to your environments before proceeding with the <Constant name="fusion" /> upgrade.

## Validate and upgrade your dbt packages

> dbt packages extend your project's functionality, but they must be compatible with <Constant name="fusion" />. Most commonly used packages from dbt Labs (like `dbt_utils` and `dbt_project_evaluator`) and many community packages [already support <Constant name="fusion" />](/docs/fusion/supported-features#package-support). Before upgrading, verify your packages are compatible and upgrade them to the latest versions.

Author: ```suggestion
dbt packages extend your project's functionality, but they must be compatible with <Constant name="fusion" />. Most commonly used packages from dbt Labs (like `dbt_utils` and `dbt_project_evaluator`) and many community packages [already support <Constant name="fusion" />](/docs/fusion/supported-features#package-support). Before upgrading, verify your packages are compatible and upgrade them to the latest versions. Check for packages that support version 2.0.0, or ask the maintainer if you're unsure. 
```

:::tip What if a package isn't compatible?

If a critical package isn't yet compatible with <Constant name="fusion" />:
- Check with the package maintainer about their roadmap
- Open an issue requesting <Constant name="fusion" /> support
- Consider contributing the compatibility updates yourself

> - Temporarily remove the package until it's compatible

Reviewer 4: I'm assuming this is not a practical option for most cases. If so, we should remove it.
```suggestion
```

:::

### Step 1: Review your current packages

Identify which packages your project uses:

1. In the <Constant name="cloud_ide" />, open your project's root directory.

> 2. Look for either `packages.yml` or `dependencies.yml` file (both are valid, but `dependencies.yml` is the newer format).

Reviewer 4: To keep things as simple as possible, I'd suggest removing the parenthetical here. There's more going on than `dependencies.yml` being newer; there are things it can do that `packages.yml` can't do and vice versa. The details require an [entire section](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/mesh/govern/project-dependencies#use-cases) of the docs to explain properly.

```suggestion
2. Look for either `packages.yml` or `dependencies.yml` file.
```

   - package: dbt-labs/codegen
      version: 0.9.0
   ```

   After update:
   ```yaml
   packages:
   - package: dbt-labs/dbt_utils
      version: [">=1.0.0", "<2.0.0"]
   - package: dbt-labs/codegen
      version: [">=0.12.0", "<1.0.0"]
   ```

### Step 4: Install updated packages

After updating your package versions, install them:

1. In the <Constant name="cloud_ide" /> command line, run:
   ```bash
   dbt deps --upgrade
   ```

The `--upgrade` flag ensures dbt installs the latest versions within your specified ranges, updating the `package-lock.yml` file.

2. Review the output to confirm all packages installed successfully.
3. Check that the `package-lock.yml` file was updated with the new package versions.

:::info About package-lock.yml

The `package-lock.yml` file pins your packages to specific versions for reproducible builds. We recommend committing this file to version control so your entire team uses the same package versions.

:::

### Step 5: Test your project with updated packages

After upgrading packages, test your project to ensure everything works:

1. Run a subset of your models to verify basic functionality:
   ```bash
   dbt run --select tag:daily
   ```

> 2. Run your tests to catch any breaking changes:

Author: ```suggestion
2. Run your tests to catch any breaking changes (exact command may vary):
```

   ```bash
   dbt test

>    ```

Reviewer 4: The exact commands that are best for testing out the changes will vary and be individual -- it will be up to the user to determine the most appropriate ones for their project.

3. If you encounter issues:
   - Review the package's changelog for breaking changes
   - Adjust your code to match new package behavior

>    - If problems persist, temporarily pin to an older compatible version

Reviewer 4: It might not always be possible to pin to an older version because there might not be an older one that is compatible and has the right version range specified.

```suggestion
   - If problems persist, temporarily pin to an older compatible version (if possible)
```

### Step 6: Commit package updates

Once you've verified the updated packages work correctly:

1. In the **Version control** panel, stage your changes:
   - `packages.yml` or `dependencies.yml`
   - `package-lock.yml`

2. Add a commit message like "Upgrade dbt packages for Fusion compatibility".
3. Click **Commit and sync**.

> ## Check for known Fusion limitations

Reviewer 4: Should this be one of the initial steps rather than the last one?

Or maybe reframed to just be "Known Fusion limitations" and then _specifically_ and _individually_ link to each of the GitHub issues so they can follow along with our progress on any features relevant to them?

I know the specific GitHub issues are already contained within the [limitations table](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/fusion/supported-features#limitations), but it might be handy to also include them here.

Also would be helpful to emphasize that this guide is only discussing some _common_ scenarios and is **not** exhaustive.

Author: Great feedback and totally understand where you're coming from, but I put this towards the end because I don't want it to be a blocker for upgrading to the latest version of Core. Even if their intent isn't to upgrade to Fusion right away, just to prep for it, I wouldn't want them to see this list and then stop because there's a Fusion barrier. Upgrade to "latest", then check the limitations to see if they should move to Guide Pt. 2, if that makes sense.

3. Check your job configurations:
   - Review any jobs using `--fail-fast` flag
   - Identify jobs using `--store-failures`
   - Note any Advanced CI "compare changes" workflows

4. Review model governance settings:
   - Search for models with `deprecation_date` set
   - Note these may not generate deprecation warnings yet in <Constant name="fusion" />

### Step 3: Assess the impact

For each limitation that affects your project, determine its criticality:

- **Critical features:** Features your project can't function without:
    - If Python models are essential, you may need to wait or refactor them to SQL
    - If Semantic Layer development is active, continue those workloads on <Constant name="core" />

- **Nice-to-have features:** Features that improve workflows but aren't blockers:
    - Model-level notifications can be replaced with job-level notifications temporarily
    - SQLFluff linting can continue running with <Constant name="core" /> in CI

- **Minimal impact:** Features you can easily work around:
    - `--fail-fast` can be removed from job commands
    - `--store-failures` can be disabled temporarily

### Step 4: Create an action plan

> Based on your assessment, decide how to handle each limitation:
> 
> - Remove non-critical features:
> 
>     Temporarily disable features you can live without:
>    ```yaml
>    # Before (in model config)
>    {{ config(
>      materialized='incremental',
>      store_failures=true
>    ) }}
>    
>    # After
>    {{ config(
>      materialized='incremental'
>    ) }}
>    ```

Reviewer 4: Suggesting a few things:
1. Split into two different code examples (instead of a single one)
2. Use SQL code highlighting instead of YAML
3. Refactor invalid comments that can't be copy-pasted (like `# Before` and `# After`)

```suggestion
    Temporarily disable features you can live without:

   Before (in model config):
   ```sql
   {{ config(
     materialized='incremental',
     store_failures=true
   ) }}
   ```

   After:

   ```sql
   {{ config(
     materialized='incremental'
   ) }}
   ```
```

- Implement workarounds for low-impact features.
   - Use job-level notifications instead of model-level
   - Run SQLFluff linting separately in CI with <Constant name="core" />
   - Use standard state selection instead of granular subselectors

> - Plan hybrid environments for critical unsupported features.

Reviewer 4: Would be useful to link to a guide or describe how to create a "hybrid environment".

   - Keep specific jobs on <Constant name="core" /> (like Semantic Layer exports)
   - Migrate development and most production workloads to <Constant name="fusion" />
   - Document which jobs need to remain on <Constant name="core" /> and why

### Step 5: Document your findings

> Create a record of limitations affecting your project:

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should open a feature request for `dbt-autofix` to create a file _similar_ to `FUSION_MIGRATION.md` (but with a unique name) that calls out not-yet-supported features that it could infer?

Author: Awesome idea!

1. In your <Constant name="cloud_ide" />, create a document (like `FUSION_MIGRATION.md`) listing:
   - Features your project uses that <Constant name="fusion" /> doesn't fully support
   - Which models or jobs are affected
   - Your mitigation strategy for each limitation
   - GitHub issue links to track when features become available

> 2. It's critical that your teams understand the limitations so share this document with your stakeholders.

Reviewer 4: Love this so much 🤩
